Document limitation of rewrite regarding occurrence selection. (#13789)
coq/coq: doc/sphinx/proofs/writing-proofs/rewriting.rst

      oriented_rewriter ::= {? {| -> | <- } } {? @natural } {? {| ? | ! } } @one_term_with_bindings
      one_term_with_bindings ::= {? > } @one_term {? with @bindings }

>    Replace subterms with other subterms that have been proven to be equal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Replaces subterms with other subterms that have been proven to be equal.
```
The implicit subject of the sentence (the rewrite tactic) is singular.

>    Replace terms with other terms by using proofs that these are
>    equals.  The type of :n:`@one_term` must have the form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Rewrite subterms with other subterms that have been proven to be equal.
     The type of :n:`@one_term` must have the form:
```

I prefer using "rewrite" in this first sentence because a) it's the name of the tactic being described and b) there is a distinct "replace" tactic.  The ordinary meanings of the two words seem almost synonymous.  Not clear to me we want to make precisely distinguished technical terms, either.  Though arguably "replace" is slightly clearer than "rewrite".  Up to you.

Author: My intuition is that we rewrite the entire goal by replacing subterms with other subterms. I'll keep the word "replace" here and apply the rest of your suggestion.

   Some of the variables :g:`x`\ :sub:`i` are solved by unification,
   and some of the types :n:`A__1, ..., A__n` may become new
   subgoals.  :tacn:`rewrite` won't find occurrences inside `forall` that refer

>    to variables bound by the `forall`; use the much more advanced :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   to variables bound by the `forall`; use the more advanced :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`
```

I think including "much" doesn't add anythin.

     any of them can be rewritten.  If not specified, only the first occurrence
     in the conclusion is replaced.

     .. note::

        If :n:`at @occs_nums` is specified, rewriting is always done
        with :ref:`setoid rewriting <generalizedrewriting>`, even for
        :term:`Leibniz equality`, which means that you must `Require

>         Setoid` to use that form.  However, note that :tacn:`rewrite`

Reviewer 2: Is that still true? I think it has been several years since `Require Setoid` is no longer required (fortunately).

Author: Unfortunately yes, this is still true. And if you didn't notice it, it's probably because you load it transitively. E.g. by doing `Require Import Arith.`

Reviewer 2: Unbelievable...

        (even when using setoid rewriting) and :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`
        don't behave identically (as already mentioned above).

     .. note::

        For each selected hypothesis (and the conclusion),
        :tacn:`rewrite` will instantiate the rewriting lemma first
        before taking the `at` clause into account, which limits the
        number of occurrences that can be rewritten (see `#13780
        <https://github.com/coq/coq/issues/13780>`_).  You can force
        :tacn:`rewrite` to instantiate the rewriting lemma differently

>         by using a `with` clause (see :n:`@one_term_with_bindings`).

Reviewer 2: An example would be better than pointing to an issue. By the way, there are other duplicates of this issue, e.g.,  #2564.

Author: Updated with an example and more information extracted from #2564.
Thanks!

     any of them can be rewritten.  If not specified, only the first occurrence
     in the conclusion is replaced.

     .. note::

        If :n:`at @occs_nums` is specified, rewriting is always done
        with :ref:`setoid rewriting <generalizedrewriting>`, even for
        Leibniz equality, which means that you must `Require
        Setoid` to use that form.  However, note that :tacn:`rewrite`
        (even when using setoid rewriting) and :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`
        don't behave identically (as already mentioned above).

     .. note::

        For each selected hypothesis (and the conclusion),

>         :tacn:`rewrite` will instantiate the rewriting lemma first

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        :tacn:`rewrite` instantiates the rewriting lemma first
```

Present tense is fine here.

        before taking the `at` clause into account, which limits the
        number of occurrences that can be rewritten.  You can force
        :tacn:`rewrite` to instantiate the rewriting lemma differently
        by using a `with` clause (see :n:`@one_term_with_bindings`) or
        you can use :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`, which considers each
        occurrence separately.

        .. example::

           .. coqtop:: none

              Require Import Arith.

>            If we want to rewrite the right-hand side, it will not work
>            like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           While rewriting the left-hand side works with `at 1`, if we want to rewrite the right-hand side,
           this doesn't work:
```

Seems like a bug that we should fix soon.

Author: That's not exactly a bug. See the discussions linked from this PR.

Reviewer: I read the issue.  Why do you not think it's a bug?  It's unexpected behavior. 
Shouldn't we try to state when/why it fails rather than just say it fails for this single example?  Of course, your changes are a step forward.

Reviewer: I read the issue.  Why do you not think it's s bug?  Would be better to explain how it actually works rather than just a single example.  Occurrence clauses should behave consistently.  It should be possible to do a deprecation and users can get the old behavior with explicit bindings. IMHO.  What you've added is a step forward b of course.

Author: Well, I did think this was a bug initially. This is why I opened the issue. It's no longer a bug if developers tell me this is according to the spec, even if the spec is weird. I documented the spec. Now, the question becomes whether we want to change the spec to have more consistent behavior. I would tend to think so but others seem to think it would be too impactful. The only way to know is to test. On the other hand, I'm not keen to start doing that now given that it's not clear to me what the future of `rewrite` vs `setoid_rewrite` vs SSReflect's `rewrite` (which is often claimed to be better) is.

>Would be better to explain how it actually works rather than just a single example.

I did explain quite precisely what happens. I only added an example because Guillaume asked for one. But the explanation is still there, above the example:

>For each selected hypothesis (and the conclusion), `rewrite` instantiates the rewriting lemma first before taking the `at` clause into account, which limits the number of occurrences that can be rewritten.

Reviewer: > It's no longer a bug if developers tell me this is according to the spec, even if the spec is weird.

Well, no.  If the spec is weird for no good reason, that is a bug.  Bugs can be a discrepancy at the level of spec versus behavior (objective) OR spec versus usability (subjective).  If the spec says ```The :tacn:`bombs away` tactic formats your hard drive```, that's absurd and absolutely a bug.

If you're willing, it would be great to evaluate the impact of the change and see how much stuff breaks and how hard it is to fix--after inquiring about the future of the various rewrite tactics you mention.  If we want to make it easy for users, we could do the matching both ways and give a warning when they differ.  Or create a `rewrite old` variant with the current behavior.

Author: >If you're willing, it would be great to evaluate the impact of the change and see how much stuff breaks and how hard it is to fix--after inquiring about the future of the various rewrite tactics you mention.

It's going to be a long and complex process to understand, decide and act to have these three tactics become one. Until this is the case, it's not clear how much effort should be spent on changing their current behavior. So no, I'm not really willing to invest my own time in this now.

Reviewer: That's fine, not surprising.

           .. coqtop:: out

>               Lemma add_assoc x y : x + y = y + x.

Reviewer: Would you modify this so it is indeed the associative property?  Here and below.  (misnamed and perhaps confusingly equivalent to `Nat.add_comm`)

Author: Ah right, this was my initial example. I forgot to change the name.

           .. coqtop:: all fail abort

              rewrite Nat.add_comm at 2.

>            A solution is to explicitly provide a different
>            instantiation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           One solution is to explicitly provide a different
           instantiation:
```

We don't explain the use of `bindings` nor do we use the term "instantiation" here, so this assumes you know what that's about.  Perhaps you could explain `bindings`?

Author: I expect we'll eventually move this term_with_bindings in the tactics chapter and explain it here.

           .. coqtop:: out

>               Lemma add_assoc x y : x + y = y + x.

Reviewer: You think it's necessary to show this again given that it already appears only a few lines above?

Author: I did several tests and it looked better like this.

Author: For the record, the name doesn't actually show in the output. But I'll replace this in the code anyway.

My reason for switching from an example based on `add_assoc` to this one is that this one is clearer on which occurrence is the first one and which is the second one.

           .. coqtop:: all abort

              rewrite Nat.add_comm with (m := x).

           Another solution is to call :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`:

           .. coqtop:: out

>               Lemma add_assoc x y : x + y = y + x.

Reviewer: ditto

     any of them can be rewritten.  If not specified, only the first occurrence
     in the conclusion is replaced.

     .. note::

        If :n:`at @occs_nums` is specified, rewriting is always done
        with :ref:`setoid rewriting <generalizedrewriting>`, even for
        Leibniz equality, which means that you must `Require
        Setoid` to use that form.  However, note that :tacn:`rewrite`
        (even when using setoid rewriting) and :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`
        don't behave identically (as already mentioned above).

     .. note::

>         For each selected hypothesis (and the conclusion),
>         :tacn:`rewrite` instantiates the rewriting lemma first
>         before taking the `at` clause into account, which limits the
>         number of occurrences that can be rewritten.  You can force
>         :tacn:`rewrite` to instantiate the rewriting lemma differently
>         by using a `with` clause (see :n:`@one_term_with_bindings`) or
>         you can use :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`, which considers each
>         occurrence separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        For each selected hypothesis and/or the conclusion,
        :tacn:`rewrite` finds the first matching subterm in depth-first search
        order and binds the free variables of the lemma.  Then, if the `at` clause
        is specified, only subterms with the same bindings for the free variables
        will be counted in determining the occurrence number.  This limits
        which matches of the lemma can be rewritten.  You can get around
        this limitation by explicitly specifying how some or all of the free
        variables are bound
        by using a `with` clause (see :n:`@one_term_with_bindings`).
        You can also use :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`, which does the matching before
        binding the free variables of the lemma.
```

As I commented elsewhere, "instantiates" is undefined and IMHO unclear.  "instantiate" means "to represent (an abstraction) by a concrete instance" (Merriam-Webster) or the less clear "represent as or by an instance" (Oxford).  https://www.dictionary.com/browse/instantiation does have the intended meaning: "the process of deriving an individual statement from a general one by replacing the variable with a name or other referring expression"--this meaning is new to me, perhaps should be a defined term.  I am accustomed to "instantiation" meaning to create an object belonging to a class (aka create an "instance").

Author: "bind" is a good replacement, probably more accurate and specific.

     any of them can be rewritten.  If not specified, only the first occurrence
     in the conclusion is replaced.

     .. note::

        If :n:`at @occs_nums` is specified, rewriting is always done
        with :ref:`setoid rewriting <generalizedrewriting>`, even for
        Leibniz equality, which means that you must `Require
        Setoid` to use that form.  However, note that :tacn:`rewrite`
        (even when using setoid rewriting) and :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`
        don't behave identically (as already mentioned above).

     .. note::

        For each selected hypothesis and/or the conclusion,
        :tacn:`rewrite` finds the first matching subterm in depth-first search
        order and binds the free variables of the lemma.  Then, if the `at` clause

>         is specified, only subterms with the same bindings for the free variables

Author: The reference to `pattern` is because it works the same for this tactic?

>         is specified, only subterms with the same bindings for the free variables

Reviewer 2: Yes, perhaps my mental model is wrong, but `rewrite L at occ` is just syntactic sugar for `let v := select L in pattern v at occ ; apply (eq_ind L).`

        will be counted in determining the occurrence number.  This limits
        which matches of the lemma can be rewritten.  You can get around
        this limitation by explicitly specifying how some or all of the free
        variables are bound
        by using a `with` clause (see :n:`@one_term_with_bindings`).
        You can also use :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`, which does the matching before

>         binding the free variables of the lemma.

Reviewer 2: I am a bit reluctant to mention `setoid_rewrite` here. It is a completely different beast. It is not just a matter of counting occurrences. First, it selects the other subterms modulo convertibility rather than identity. Second, it silently ignores `at` clauses, if they are part of a larger occurrence or if they do not occur. Third, it applies the lemma as many times as there are occurrences, despite them being convertible. So, I am a bit wary at suggesting to the user that `setoid_rewrite` is a good substitute for `rewrite`. It is great in presence of setoids, morphisms, orders, etc, but when it comes to plain Leibniz' equality, its features are a plague.

Author: Ah OK. Note though that it is also recommended above to find occurrences to rewrite under binders.

Reviewer 2: Which part are you referring to?

Anyway, `rewrite` has no problem finding occurrences under binders. What it cannot do is to rewrite bound occurrences (since equality is not extensional in Coq). For that, you need `setoid_rewrite`. But even so, if you just naively replace `rewrite` by `setoid_rewrite`, then you will get a crazy error message. (Just test it for yourself. That is a sight to behold. This is even worse than the error messages you get due to templates in C++.) You first have to prove (and declare) that all the functions that occur in your goal are morphisms for extensional equality. So, again, not something we should suggest the user without a lot of care.

     any of them can be rewritten.  If not specified, only the first occurrence
     in the conclusion is replaced.

     .. note::

        If :n:`at @occs_nums` is specified, rewriting is always done
        with :ref:`setoid rewriting <generalizedrewriting>`, even for
        Leibniz equality, which means that you must `Require
        Setoid` to use that form.  However, note that :tacn:`rewrite`
        (even when using setoid rewriting) and :tacn:`setoid_rewrite`
        don't behave identically (as is noted above and below).

   :n:`by @ltac_expr3`
     If specified, is used to resolve all side conditions generated by the tactic.

   .. note::

      For each selected hypothesis and/or the conclusion,
      :tacn:`rewrite` finds the first matching subterm in

>       depth-first search order. Only subterms identical to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      depth-first search order. Only subterms identical to
```

>       matched one are rewritten.  If the `at` clause is specified,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      that first matched subterm are rewritten.  If the `at` clause is specified,
```

      only these subterms are considered when counting occurrences.
      To select a different set of matching subterms, you can
      specify how some or all of the free variables are bound by
      using a `with` clause (see :n:`@one_term_with_bindings`).

      For instance, if we want to rewrite the right-hand side in the

>       following goal, it will not work like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      following goal, this will not work:
```

Less vague

      .. coqtop:: none

         Require Import Arith.

      .. coqtop:: out

         Lemma example x y : x + y = y + x.

      .. coqtop:: all fail

         rewrite Nat.add_comm at 2.

      One can explicitly specify how some variables are bound to match
      a different subterm:

      .. coqtop:: all abort

         rewrite Nat.add_comm with (m := x).

>       Note that the much more advanced :tacn:`setoid_rewrite` tactic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Note that the more advanced :tacn:`setoid_rewrite` tactic
```

      behaves differently, and thus the number of occurrences

>       available to rewrite may differ if using one or the other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      available to rewrite may differ between the two tactics.
```
